README.md, before:

# z80

A complete z80 emulator written in C99. The emulator currently passes both zexdoc and zexall Z80 instruction exerciser tests. See `z80_tests.c` for example usage. Note that cycles are counted at instruction level.

You can run the tests by running `make && ./z80_tests`, which outputs:

```
*** TEST: roms/prelim.com
Preliminary tests complete
*** 899 instructions executed on 8721 cycles (expected=8721, diff=0)

*** TEST: roms/zexdoc.cim
Z80doc instruction exerciser
<adc,sbc> hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>....  OK
add hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>..........  OK
add ix,<bc,de,ix,sp>..........  OK
add iy,<bc,de,iy,sp>..........  OK
aluop a,nn....................  OK
aluop a,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
aluop a,<ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>.....  OK
aluop a,(<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
bit n,(<ix,iy>+1).............  OK
bit n,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>....  OK
cpd<r>........................  OK
cpi<r>........................  OK
<daa,cpl,scf,ccf>.............  OK
<inc,dec> a...................  OK
<inc,dec> b...................  OK
<inc,dec> bc..................  OK
<inc,dec> c...................  OK
<inc,dec> d...................  OK
<inc,dec> de..................  OK
<inc,dec> e...................  OK
<inc,dec> h...................  OK
<inc,dec> hl..................  OK
<inc,dec> ix..................  OK
<inc,dec> iy..................  OK
<inc,dec> l...................  OK
<inc,dec> (hl)................  OK
<inc,dec> sp..................  OK
<inc,dec> (<ix,iy>+1).........  OK
<inc,dec> ixh.................  OK
<inc,dec> ixl.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyh.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyl.................  OK
ld <bc,de>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld hl,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld sp,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld <ix,iy>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld (nnnn),<bc,de>.............  OK
ld (nnnn),hl..................  OK
ld (nnnn),sp..................  OK
ld (nnnn),<ix,iy>.............  OK
ld <bc,de,hl,sp>,nnnn.........  OK
ld <ix,iy>,nnnn...............  OK
ld a,<(bc),(de)>..............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>,nn....  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),nn.............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e>,(<ix,iy>+1)......  OK
ld <h,l>,(<ix,iy>+1)..........  OK
ld a,(<ix,iy>+1)..............  OK
ld <ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>,nn.......  OK
ld <bcdehla>,<bcdehla>........  OK
ld <bcdexya>,<bcdexya>........  OK
ld a,(nnnn) / ld (nnnn),a.....  OK
ldd<r> (1)....................  OK
ldd<r> (2)....................  OK
ldi<r> (1)....................  OK
ldi<r> (2)....................  OK
neg...........................  OK
<rrd,rld>.....................  OK
<rlca,rrca,rla,rra>...........  OK
shf/rot (<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
shf/rot <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
<set,res> n,<bcdehl(hl)a>.....  OK
<set,res> n,(<ix,iy>+1).......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<b,c,d,e>......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<h,l>..........  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),a..............  OK
ld (<bc,de>),a................  OK
Tests complete
*** 5764169747 instructions executed on 46734978649 cycles (expected=46734978649, diff=0)

*** TEST: roms/zexall.cim
Z80all instruction exerciser
<adc,sbc> hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>....  OK
add hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>..........  OK
add ix,<bc,de,ix,sp>..........  OK
add iy,<bc,de,iy,sp>..........  OK
aluop a,nn....................  OK
aluop a,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
aluop a,<ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>.....  OK
aluop a,(<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
bit n,(<ix,iy>+1).............  OK
bit n,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>....  OK
cpd<r>........................  OK
cpi<r>........................  OK
<daa,cpl,scf,ccf>.............  OK
<inc,dec> a...................  OK
<inc,dec> b...................  OK
<inc,dec> bc..................  OK
<inc,dec> c...................  OK
<inc,dec> d...................  OK
<inc,dec> de..................  OK
<inc,dec> e...................  OK
<inc,dec> h...................  OK
<inc,dec> hl..................  OK
<inc,dec> ix..................  OK
<inc,dec> iy..................  OK
<inc,dec> l...................  OK
<inc,dec> (hl)................  OK
<inc,dec> sp..................  OK
<inc,dec> (<ix,iy>+1).........  OK
<inc,dec> ixh.................  OK
<inc,dec> ixl.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyh.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyl.................  OK
ld <bc,de>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld hl,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld sp,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld <ix,iy>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld (nnnn),<bc,de>.............  OK
ld (nnnn),hl..................  OK
ld (nnnn),sp..................  OK
ld (nnnn),<ix,iy>.............  OK
ld <bc,de,hl,sp>,nnnn.........  OK
ld <ix,iy>,nnnn...............  OK
ld a,<(bc),(de)>..............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>,nn....  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),nn.............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e>,(<ix,iy>+1)......  OK
ld <h,l>,(<ix,iy>+1)..........  OK
ld a,(<ix,iy>+1)..............  OK
ld <ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>,nn.......  OK
ld <bcdehla>,<bcdehla>........  OK
ld <bcdexya>,<bcdexya>........  OK
ld a,(nnnn) / ld (nnnn),a.....  OK
ldd<r> (1)....................  OK
ldd<r> (2)....................  OK
ldi<r> (1)....................  OK
ldi<r> (2)....................  OK
neg...........................  OK
<rrd,rld>.....................  OK
<rlca,rrca,rla,rra>...........  OK
shf/rot (<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
shf/rot <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
<set,res> n,<bcdehl(hl)a>.....  OK
<set,res> n,(<ix,iy>+1).......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<b,c,d,e>......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<h,l>..........  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),a..............  OK
ld (<bc,de>),a................  OK
Tests complete
*** 5764169747 instructions executed on 46734978649 cycles (expected=46734978649, diff=0)
```

## TODO

- [ ] interrupt mode 0

## Resources

- [Z80 CPU User Manual](http://z80.info/zip/z80cpu_um.pdf)
- [Z80 instruction set (+ timings)](http://map.grauw.nl/resources/z80instr.php)
- [Z80 timings](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1eygwsPkhpBi6oLQI1mre7kxyN11o1j0TmvXCz1aBLLY/edit?usp=sharing)
- [Decoding Z80 Opcodes](http://z80.info/decoding.htm)
- [anotherlin/z80emu](https://github.com/anotherlin/z80emu)

Commit message:

added test roms + implemented interrupt mode 0

README.md, after:

# z80

A complete z80 emulator written in C99 under the MIT license. The emulator currently passes both zexdoc and zexall Z80 instruction exerciser tests. See `z80_tests.c` for example usage. Note that cycles are counted at instruction level.

You can run the tests by running `make && ./z80_tests`, which outputs:

```
*** TEST: roms/prelim.com
Preliminary tests complete
*** 899 instructions executed on 8721 cycles (expected=8721, diff=0)

*** TEST: roms/zexdoc.cim
Z80doc instruction exerciser
<adc,sbc> hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>....  OK
add hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>..........  OK
add ix,<bc,de,ix,sp>..........  OK
add iy,<bc,de,iy,sp>..........  OK
aluop a,nn....................  OK
aluop a,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
aluop a,<ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>.....  OK
aluop a,(<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
bit n,(<ix,iy>+1).............  OK
bit n,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>....  OK
cpd<r>........................  OK
cpi<r>........................  OK
<daa,cpl,scf,ccf>.............  OK
<inc,dec> a...................  OK
<inc,dec> b...................  OK
<inc,dec> bc..................  OK
<inc,dec> c...................  OK
<inc,dec> d...................  OK
<inc,dec> de..................  OK
<inc,dec> e...................  OK
<inc,dec> h...................  OK
<inc,dec> hl..................  OK
<inc,dec> ix..................  OK
<inc,dec> iy..................  OK
<inc,dec> l...................  OK
<inc,dec> (hl)................  OK
<inc,dec> sp..................  OK
<inc,dec> (<ix,iy>+1).........  OK
<inc,dec> ixh.................  OK
<inc,dec> ixl.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyh.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyl.................  OK
ld <bc,de>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld hl,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld sp,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld <ix,iy>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld (nnnn),<bc,de>.............  OK
ld (nnnn),hl..................  OK
ld (nnnn),sp..................  OK
ld (nnnn),<ix,iy>.............  OK
ld <bc,de,hl,sp>,nnnn.........  OK
ld <ix,iy>,nnnn...............  OK
ld a,<(bc),(de)>..............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>,nn....  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),nn.............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e>,(<ix,iy>+1)......  OK
ld <h,l>,(<ix,iy>+1)..........  OK
ld a,(<ix,iy>+1)..............  OK
ld <ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>,nn.......  OK
ld <bcdehla>,<bcdehla>........  OK
ld <bcdexya>,<bcdexya>........  OK
ld a,(nnnn) / ld (nnnn),a.....  OK
ldd<r> (1)....................  OK
ldd<r> (2)....................  OK
ldi<r> (1)....................  OK
ldi<r> (2)....................  OK
neg...........................  OK
<rrd,rld>.....................  OK
<rlca,rrca,rla,rra>...........  OK
shf/rot (<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
shf/rot <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
<set,res> n,<bcdehl(hl)a>.....  OK
<set,res> n,(<ix,iy>+1).......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<b,c,d,e>......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<h,l>..........  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),a..............  OK
ld (<bc,de>),a................  OK
Tests complete
*** 5764169747 instructions executed on 46734978649 cycles (expected=46734978649, diff=0)

*** TEST: roms/zexall.cim
Z80all instruction exerciser
<adc,sbc> hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>....  OK
add hl,<bc,de,hl,sp>..........  OK
add ix,<bc,de,ix,sp>..........  OK
add iy,<bc,de,iy,sp>..........  OK
aluop a,nn....................  OK
aluop a,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
aluop a,<ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>.....  OK
aluop a,(<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
bit n,(<ix,iy>+1).............  OK
bit n,<b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>....  OK
cpd<r>........................  OK
cpi<r>........................  OK
<daa,cpl,scf,ccf>.............  OK
<inc,dec> a...................  OK
<inc,dec> b...................  OK
<inc,dec> bc..................  OK
<inc,dec> c...................  OK
<inc,dec> d...................  OK
<inc,dec> de..................  OK
<inc,dec> e...................  OK
<inc,dec> h...................  OK
<inc,dec> hl..................  OK
<inc,dec> ix..................  OK
<inc,dec> iy..................  OK
<inc,dec> l...................  OK
<inc,dec> (hl)................  OK
<inc,dec> sp..................  OK
<inc,dec> (<ix,iy>+1).........  OK
<inc,dec> ixh.................  OK
<inc,dec> ixl.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyh.................  OK
<inc,dec> iyl.................  OK
ld <bc,de>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld hl,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld sp,(nnnn)..................  OK
ld <ix,iy>,(nnnn).............  OK
ld (nnnn),<bc,de>.............  OK
ld (nnnn),hl..................  OK
ld (nnnn),sp..................  OK
ld (nnnn),<ix,iy>.............  OK
ld <bc,de,hl,sp>,nnnn.........  OK
ld <ix,iy>,nnnn...............  OK
ld a,<(bc),(de)>..............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>,nn....  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),nn.............  OK
ld <b,c,d,e>,(<ix,iy>+1)......  OK
ld <h,l>,(<ix,iy>+1)..........  OK
ld a,(<ix,iy>+1)..............  OK
ld <ixh,ixl,iyh,iyl>,nn.......  OK
ld <bcdehla>,<bcdehla>........  OK
ld <bcdexya>,<bcdexya>........  OK
ld a,(nnnn) / ld (nnnn),a.....  OK
ldd<r> (1)....................  OK
ldd<r> (2)....................  OK
ldi<r> (1)....................  OK
ldi<r> (2)....................  OK
neg...........................  OK
<rrd,rld>.....................  OK
<rlca,rrca,rla,rra>...........  OK
shf/rot (<ix,iy>+1)...........  OK
shf/rot <b,c,d,e,h,l,(hl),a>..  OK
<set,res> n,<bcdehl(hl)a>.....  OK
<set,res> n,(<ix,iy>+1).......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<b,c,d,e>......  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),<h,l>..........  OK
ld (<ix,iy>+1),a..............  OK
ld (<bc,de>),a................  OK
Tests complete
*** 5764169747 instructions executed on 46734978649 cycles (expected=46734978649, diff=0)
```

## Licensing

This project is under the MIT license; except the files in `roms` which are provided for convenience to test the z80 core implementation. These files authors' and licenses can be seen in the source files (.z80/.src files).

## Resources

- [Z80 CPU User Manual](http://z80.info/zip/z80cpu_um.pdf)
- [Z80 instruction set (+ timings)](http://map.grauw.nl/resources/z80instr.php)
- [Z80 timings](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1eygwsPkhpBi6oLQI1mre7kxyN11o1j0TmvXCz1aBLLY/edit?usp=sharing)
- [Decoding Z80 Opcodes](http://z80.info/decoding.htm)
- [anotherlin/z80emu](https://github.com/anotherlin/z80emu)
